# $Id: README 438 2005-07-20 12:09:50Z mhoebeke $

SPatt: Statistics for Patterns
------------------------------

I - Introduction
----------------

It is a package including several tools designed to
help to assess statistical significance of short
patterns.

Considering a pattern P, on can easily compute its
number of occurrence Nobs(P) on a given text. The
challenge is to determine how unusual is that observation.

In order to do so, we choose to modelize the usual text
as a random markovian source (of a chosen order and which
parameters can either be provided by the user or estimated
on the observed sequence). The number of occurrence of
pattern P on this random text is therefore a random variable.

The challenge is to determine the distribution of N(P) and,
more specifically, to compute the p-value associated to the
observation: P( N(P) > Nobs(P) ) for a pattern occurring more
than expected (let say an over-represented pattern),
P( N(P) < Nobs(P) ) for a pattern occurring less than expected
(an under-represented pattern).

The programs in this package propose several statistical methods
to compute these p-values, or more specifically to compute the
pattern statistic S defined by:

S(P)=-log10 ( p-value ) if P is over-represented
S(P)=+log10 ( p-value ) if P is under-represented

Here is a short description of each of the programs:

* sspatt (Simple Statistics for Patterns): this program use the
simple (but false) approximation of the N(P) distribution
by a binomial distribution. Computation are very fast and tests
show that the results are also very reliable.

* ldspatt (Large Deviation Statitics for Patterns): not yet included
this program use the large deviations theory to provide asymptotic
approximations of S(P). Results are very reliable for rare events
(ie great value of S(P) in terms of magnitude), but have poor accurracy
for frequent events. Computation are also quite slow due to the complexity
increasing exponentially with the length of considered patterns

* xspatt (eXact Statistics for Patterns): not yet included
description coming soon.

* gspatt (Gaussian Statistics for Patterns): not yet included
description coming soon.

II - Common conventions
-----------------------

sequence file format: only the fasta format is accepted. The file
can contain several sequences separed by title lines. Programs will
treat the file as a single sequence in one or several pieces.

III - Detailled options
-----------------------

see man pages.

IV - Examples
-------------

sspatt:

sspatt ecoli.fasta -p g.tggtgg -m 2

computes statistic for pattern {gatggtgg,gctggtgg,ggtggtgg,gttggtgg}
in respect with an order 2 markov model which parameters are estimated
on the sequence.

sspatt ecoli.fasta -l 4 -m 1 --all-words

computes statistics for all words of length 4 in respect with an order
1 markov model which parameter are estimated on the sequence.

sspatt ecoli.fasta -p tagctaggc -m 4 -M ecolim4.markov -S ecolim4.stationnary

computes statistics for tagctaggc in respect with an order 4 markov model which
parameters are estimated on the sequence and outputs these parameters in the
file ecolim4.markov and output the corresponding stationnary distribution in
the file ecolim4.stationnary.

sspatt phage-lambda.fasta -p gctggtgg -m 4 -U ecolim4.markov

computes statistic for gctggtgg in respect with an order 4 markov model which
parameters are read from the file ecolim4.markov.


VI.1 - Patches
--------------
Since GSL library was updated, ETIME api had to be changed.
https://gcc.gnu.org/ml/fortran/2007-03/msg00305.html

Library Path
sudo find /usr -iname 'libgfortran*.a' | xargs shasum
export LIBRARY_PATH=$1

V - Source availability
-----------------------

If you get the file without the source distribution (for example in a binary distribution)
please note that you can get the sources at the following adress:

http://stat.genopole.cnrs.fr/spatt/

